Every man should have a plan to save the world.

If you like breathing, or know anybody that does;
This is your war.


Programmers are the eqivelent of literate people in the dark ages; so we have to 
1. Share that knowledge;
2. Use it correctly.
3. Not become corrupted by it.









Here's some tricky language.
(Stay)


We normally use'language' to describe a way to communicate;  but actually that's a separate process called speech.
And just like we can sometimes speak without thinking, sometimes we can think without speaking.
In this sense langauge is cognitive, not communicative. 

IE
Speech is the externalzation of a brain-process we call 'the mind' which requires language.  Somehow the brain tissue can think, and that's where language is happening.

Let's call this the 'new way' of understanding language.
'Traditional way' : langauge is how we communicate.
'New way' : language is one how we think.   






NB: I'm not saying language is thought itself.









DCI-Thamania pursuit of Excellence

Let's do the best we can.

	
Lets always look for oportunities to build on what we've done so far.

example








A Ċairde,

Tá muid anseo chun ríomhaireacht  a foghlaim go leibhéal gairimúl.

Beidh orainn JavaScript a foghlam. Cad atá i gceist le sin?

Buntús an teanga a usáid chun cláranna simplí a scríobh.

Foghlaimoidh muid conas na cláranna a deanamh níos sofisticúl, tríd íad a roinnt le HTML agus CSS.

Foghlaimoidh muid rún na mbunachar.

Eiroidh na cláranna seo chomh casta go mbaidh orainn React a usaid chun an JS a bainistiú.
Beidh tionscanamh le deanamh, chun ár dtuiscint a chleachta agus a leirú;
Agus thart ar ansin, beidh an chuid seo den cúrsa críochnaithe.





Tá tú congrach den áit sin a bhí ann,
Roimh ar lás ár chead sínsear an chéad tine.

Is it though?
Tae. Bainne. Bus. Taoiseach. Siúcra. Madra. Dáil. Dia dhuit. Mise Tomás. Fear, Ban, Dubh, Éire, Bearla, Pionta, Ceol, Baile Átha Cliath, Dún na nGall, Spúnóg, Bó...
I think most of the country can speak more than a few words.
I also think that speech is to language as ripples are to dolphins.

But here's a thought worth a few sleepless nights:








What would the consequences of a successful revival be?


 And I want you to ask yourself if it is fair to determine the fate of one language entirely from the perspective of another.

You're so outspoken against Irish, but do you actually know anything about it?

Identifying and investing in a unique local resource seems like a good idea to me. Whether it costs 2 million or 200 million, that investment goes into the economy of Northern Ireland; not into it's incinerators.

And who knows what may arise? Maybe nothing! Maybe it dies anyway.
But for honour's sake; at least stop this nonsense of insisting we 'switch it off' for the convenience of officialdom.
That's been the case for so long that Gaeilge has been almost wiped from the face of the earth.
And would that make us richer? Would we have more to offer without it? Without a deep understanding of Irish, how can you really judge it's worth?

Here look. To all of you Mé Féiners:

Irish is our greatest achievement. Why?
Because

Cé nach tuigeann seo:

tá sí beo.

Didn't like Irish in school? Join the fucking club. It was a field-dressing on our open heart. You were taught English and Maths. That was for you. You were taught Irish. That was for us. To keep our ancient Gaelic thing alive.

Maith thú. You did an incredibly difficult thing, if you kept some ember of it alive in you.
You don't have to use it if you don't want to. But you had to learn enough so that not using it was a choice, because that's the only way everyone else has a choice.

Irish is our greatest resource. Why? Because it's different. It's an original. It's an alternative. The world is hungry for the authentic, the real, the wonderful. And we live with this sleeping goddess.
It's boundary is all that can be known or imagined. For 10 generations, we've only had the strength to pass it on, from the heritage of each wave of living people, to their legacy, to us.
It's true: it may someday sink into the earth, and be as lost as Philistine.

But I believe that the Irish have quietly done something strange and wise and wonderful. As a Nation, we have reserved the right and capacity to be a Gaelic people.


If we wake her, the world will rise.
A ċara,

It's not money thrown into a furnace and burned. It is a wage paid to hundreds of people, for specialist work, and to thousands of people, for more general skills. These people live in Northern Ireland and can spend that money on goods and services in Northern Ireland, thus helping the economy. Look at it like a renewable resource, or a knowledge economy. It's not precisely that, but that's as well as I can describe it in brief in English; except to say that Irish is also an Identity. It is how many of us see ourselves. But we have been taught to 'switch it off' for the convenience of officialdom. That's been the case for so long that this incredibly versatile resource is at risk of slipping away, forever.

Which is unfortunate because Irish is also an ancient and vibrant ecology of ideas. Being able to represent ourselves to the government as Gaelic people is important to some of us, and it should be important to the Government, too.

Hi! I'm the exact opposite of you!
Respectfully, it's plain to me that Irish is not dead. We can talk about that, if you like.

But aside from that, I'm really interested in your view on a related hypothetical: what would happen if the people who can speak Irish, chose to?
How do you imagine it would play out and would there be any personal/national/international consequences?

Right! Speech itself is just a particular kind of noise. But from an English thinking perspective, Irish only exists in the sound of speech. And so we let measure of Irish be speech, despite as you say, these symbols not being our thoughts. Failing to challenge this misapprehension has lead perfectly reasonable people to earnestly ask what's the point of Irish; though they'd never ask what's the point of thinking.

I have put forward the idea that in Ireland we mostly misunderstand the nature of language. We think of it in terms of communication, and measure it in terms of the number of "speakers".
This simple counting of the amount of Irish speakers naturally results in a (negative and widely held) view of Irish as being in dire health.

I'm an Irish speaker. But I'm not speaking. Am I an Irish speaker? Are there fewer Irish speakers, at night? This metric is flawed.

Rather than "Irish speakers", if we take the vitality of Irish as "the number of people capable of altering their thought patterns chun cíall a deanamh as a leithead seo"; we might regard Irish as being surprisingly healthy, and on the brink of a tremendous awakening.

Because though millions don't think in the "Irish way", Millions can. And Millions more would be eager to. The commercial, the environmental, the social, the cultural, the international and the near mystical experience of living through such a revival support my belief that this view is both more accurate and more useful than viewing language as merely a way to communicate.

This Irish-as-altered-state view would also invite a re-appraisal of our oft-criticized education system. Popularly reviled for "forcing-it-down-our-throats"; mocked and even blamed for the present state of Irish: In the paradigm I'm proposing, the system might actually be celebrated as a major cultural achievement. It was an absolutely successful emergency stabilization of the language. It's job was to lock Irish into our national psyche. And it did. And now (go lách) we can turn the green key.

Nios mó?

I think it's the other way, actually. Many people who say they can't speak Irish often know a great deal. In any event, my beef is with the English habit of framing the issue in terms of 'Irish speakers'. Language isn't merely speech. Consider how we use language when we're not speaking.

...you're doing it right now, aren't you.

Yes, it's as deep as people.

Language is how you think.


Wrenfield
0 points
·
2 years ago
·
edited 1 year ago
Because it's a choice. Being Irish is not an achievement. It makes more sense to be proud of being an Irish speaker.
That kind of Irishness is a choice, and an achievement. It requires thought and effort, and it results in insight.

The Irish way of thinking isn't less valuable for being rare and unique in the world.Respectfully, you're only looking at this from an English language point of view. The subject being discussed is (by definition) not understandable in English. All I can suggest is that you take a minute to consider how much of your self is your mind. That's what this is about. Science technology maths and engineering are all revealed to us by language. They can be known mastered and advanced in any language. Our Nation has it's own language. Do we believe in the value of an alternative (and Gaelic) perspective?
:)

This conversation we're having has been going on for centuries:

"There can be no greater delusion than to imagine that a language can be kept alive alone by teaching. A language can have no real life unless it lives in the lives of the people." - Eoin Mac Neill, 1900

"As to the Irish language, toleration and patronage have come too late. It cannot be saved alive by any human power. ... The time for educating them in the native language has gone by forever. It is not the language of business, of modern civilisation, and it will not enable a man to get on in the world. However we may regret that any language, especially one so primitive, so expressive, so powerful as the Gaelic should cease to live, its doom is inevitable." - Anonymous author, c. 1850

"There is no other way to revive Irish than for a crowd of people to spread it." - Douglas Hyde

But something important has happened: Irish survived long enough to (at least) enter this technological age.

Tá facebook, google/gmail, firefox agus twitter i nGaeilge. Tá apps agus cluichí ar fail i nGaeilge, agus na milliún daoine á núsaid. Many dictionaries. Thousands of resources. Tutorials. Usergroups. Movies. Radio. Now, and increasingly, being a Gael is a choice, there within us, for us to discover.
I'm also an Irish speaker, but I have a different view.
I believe that Language isn't merely what is said.
Language is how the architecture of our synapses forms thought.
Language both shapes thought, and is thought.
Is fiú smaoineamh go domhain ar sin, silim.

For the next 100 years (I bid thee), there will exist a mechanism behind your eyes which will render trillions of electrochemical pulses into thought. The architecture for that process is language. Speaking and writing are merely means by which language can be articulated.

There aren't enough words on Reddit to cover the power of language, and all the things it can be, and reddit is just individuals.

We're not talking about the (brain-bendingly ellusive) capacity of an individual to touch the world with her thoughts. We're talking about a Nation sustaining her capacity to do so, across centuries. That's not fat to trim; that's destiny's bones and tendons.

price-check at isle 1.
Item : Éire.
There's no barcode.
Keep it?
throw it out?
Éire. Is it worth something or not?

Worth money? How much money? It is normal to think like that; but in this instance, the normal is wrong. Irish isn't the problem; Irish is the alternative. Our other way. Unexplored, underdeveloped. Unconquered. Éire go brách.

Maybe language IS just what we say.
But consider the actual "what" of what you are thinking, moment to moment. Unless you are in a state of zen, you're using language.
From this perspective language is a mental thing that goes deeper than brain surgery, into how we think.

Imagine for a moment the English language as a great lens, carried across generations by Earth apes.
You can look through the lens! and it will show you atoms, or distant planets, any imaginable future, past or present. Powerful enough to give rise to a mighty civilization! And what happens if you point it at itself? It shows you every elemental nuance of grammar and vocabulary; BUT you're still looking through it, not at it.

Irish is another lens.

Is it possible to think an English thought in Irish?
Irish will sooner change your mind, because different neurons firing, form different patterns than are formed in any other language.

Mainstream Ireland does not speak Irish everyday but hard hard hard work; has resulted in a broadly English speaking Nation that is reconstructing it's capacity to speak Irish and reserves the right to do so. On the surface, and from the popular perspective, it looks the same. But Gaeilge has come through into a new era: The information age.

The Penal laws are being forgotten, not the Language. And the old days of education through fear and violence are ending. 200,000 people signed up for Duolingo Gaeilge in the first few months of it's release. Podcasts, comicbooks, videogames, hiphop, documentaries plays and literature are emerging in Irish. Sooner or later people will take a look at the billion euro distance-learning industry, and the 70 million Irish diaspora; and think about making a connection.

And then as we struggle to stem the torrent of money into the country and figure out who the hell we are anois as a people; our children will try to understand what it was like to be an Irish speaker; before it was cool.

I'm not sure. It's very difficult to talk about. How can we talk meaningfully about Irish, in English? Such a discussion would always be literally thinking about it the wrong way! Because the channels of language in the brain are as delicate as thought itself.





Here's an idea which takes the form of a question. But first, let's filter out some trash ideas about hypnotism.
This is hypnosis. 
//I agree! I disagree. 
(Press x to return to the idea.)
This is hypnosis.
I agree!  I agree! 
Is this hypnosis?
//it is. it is not. In a way, it is. In a way, it is not.
Is this hypnosis?
- Media telling us what to think, advertising 
This is hypnosis.
Is this real?
//comic calibration of User's language level and openness.
Let's agree.
I agree!

Let's just say that what we mean by hypnosis for our purposes is a collaborative process.

The other stuff  //.gif  put that all in another category. Lets intend hypnosis to mean a cooperative process with a trusted partner.

Premise 1: It is normal and okay to change your mind. It is normal and Okay not to want to change your mind. 
We do it all the time, except when we are determined not to; eg when we are suspicious of or don't understand what are hearing.

And without further qualification, the question/mantra/hypnotic suggestion I'd invite you to reflect on is:
//run(Level_of_user_current_lesson)
Cad is brí le eathrú intinn?

We have established our right to Irish, and have achieved as a Nation, some capacity with it;
but the journey has left many seething with resentment, hostility and indifference.
I'm optimistic. Irish has entered the information age, alive, awake, Gaelic.


Imagine if you could somehow rip every Gaelic thing from the Earth by the roots, break each branch, ruin the fruit scorch the seeds and make it as lost as Lemnian or Philistine. Some people would. Would you?

That's a simple yes or no question, but it'll tell me a lot about how (if!) to rebut your point.

This one is a bit trickier: If you could be the one to put a "full-stop" at the end of the 10,000 year saga of Gaelic civilization, would you? Would you rip the rest of the pages out of that great book? If not, why not?

I'm just trying to imagine your view so that I can properly formulate an answer. For all I know you love Ireland so much that from your perspective, Éire can go fuck herself.

It takes space to pool the language/thought connections of Gaels.

Learning to swim in an imaginary lake is hard.

Níl easpa 'English-Brain Time', in Irish education.

Yeah, but
Tá muid anseo go foil, moṫher fuckers.
We underestimate the damage done by Cromwell/Famine/the Civil War. Given how powerful English is, and how different Irish is, maybe the national cúpla focal is an achievement. We may not speak it, but we may.


Language is the 0,0,0,0 absolute origin of all culture. All music, all art, all ethics, everything made and intended by every civilization comes from Language. Language towers over the comparatively fleeting concepts of "race" and "nationality". They are, like all concepts, entirely encapsulated by linguistic boundaries. The only phenomenon of comparative influence is geography, and it is geography (the "is" of being) which shapes language, across millennia.

Language is much deeper than can be expressed by language, so yes, too deep six everybody.

And that's all before "communication" which is an essential part of language, as it forms society's ecology of ideas. Communication is the difference between 'one smart ape' and 'an enduring civilization', capable perhaps of interstellar travel, immortality... who knows.
But still, they're dying at a rate of one every 14 days.

People argue that Irish is important to learn because it's our heritage. But it's only our heritage for a short while. Then it's our legacy. By making it part of the school curriculum- and that's literally the full extent to which it is forced on anybody- we make an alternative civilization possible.



Start by listening.
A little bit of this and this everyday will make a big difference - even if you don't understand what you're hearing in the beginning. I'd check out the Cultúrlann if you're in Belfast. Also, good resources here.

Enjoy the journey!
/////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
































  Síog: An Irish RPG


                                      Design document


Concept:  


44% of people born in Ireland can speak Irish. (2011 CSO Census)  

  
Video games can provide an environment where Irish is normal, without any question as to whether or not it is 'ok' to use Irish.  -->

As the narrative of 'Síog' unfolds, player comprehension will be supported by animations, sound effects, text content and recorded dialogue.  This will support players with poor Irish, or who are not accustomed to using their Irish language skills.  

For instance:

text appears on the screen:
'Tá sé ag cur baistí.' 

the player hears the sentence spoken, hears the rain falling, and sees the rain animated on screen.
each word in the sentence responds to touch/mouse hover by showing the English language equivelent
'Tá sé ag cur baistí.' 
IT IS      RAINING

Regardless of language level, the concept of what is happening in the game world will be clear.

The idea is to draw the player's attention as quickly as possible FROM using another language, TO what s/he is using it FOR. 


When a sound effect (.wav) file is played, it is accompanied by Irish text onomatopoeia of the sound.  These comicbook-like 'Pows!' and 'Biffs!' are intended to amuse, and to encourage players to 'hear' in the target language
.


For example : After Math.floor(Math.random()*3000)+ 5 seconds after the game begins: there's a knock on the door. We hear the knocking.wav file, and see 'Cnag-cnag!' (Knock-Knock!) appear over the door.   This helps players who are accustomed to thinking in English, to hear the sounds in Irish.  


Game play:

.  
  
Movement is controlled with the cursor keys, or by left-clicking on the target location.
The game screen has a 'Heads Up Display' (HUD) which provides information about player health /status and inventory access. The player can interact with the environment by right-clicking.  Interactions with people and objects call pop-up windows which have scrolling text, anime style animations & portraits, buttons etc.
Síog is not meant to be a difficult game, or a very long game, but has an uncommon level of detail and interactivity.  It should be possible to play through in a fairly short amount of time, but reward inquisitive players with animations, details and information.  The 'fun' comes from realising that with the right support, the player understands Irish well enough to comprehend the game world, and can  use their Irish understanding to overcome in-game challenges.  


Setting:

The game is (mostly) set in modern day Tír na nÓg.

Tír na nÓg is one of the Otherworlds of Irish mythology. 

 '...sort of an earthly paradise populated by supernatural beings'(wikipedia).

The Tír na nÓg of the game, is an archipelago where magic is commonplace and humans are rare.  The land teems with wild animals and magical creatures.  The topography is heavily forested, there are mountains,lakes, rivers and ancient bogs. Towns are small and remote, ruins are common. There is also a large cave system linking the islands of Tír na nÓg.

Clockwork and steam power technologies exist, but not gunpowder and no computers as we know them.  
The nearest Otherworld is Tír Aslínn, which is a shadowy land filled with ghosts and vampires.   
It can be reached by using Fairy circles, which can also be used (it is said) to go to a land called Banba.


  



Game world:

The game world is divided into zones.  

zone 1 :the Fianna Sídh school.
The school is quite compact, but includes kitchens, a gym, dorms, a garden, and a library.

zone 2 : The grounds around the school.
These grounds are wilder than the school garden but are still quite tame.  Fauna: rabbits, butterflies, birds.  Flora:  flowers trees shrubs.  Some old statues, a stream and an unkempt fairy circle.
The 3 or 4 screens of zone 2 are quite safe.
The most notable feature of zone 2 is a giant shaggy moth caught in a mechanical trap.  If Cleite frees the moth, he has a best buddy for the rest of the game.

Zone 3:  Forest.  Mysterious and labyrinthine.  'Giant' wasps (relative to fairies)  wander the forest and will attack Cleite if he gets too close to them.  They die/retreat with one hit if Cleite has a weapon.

 
zone 4: the cave
The cave was inhabited a long time ago.  it has a rotten wooden floor, some broken furniture and mushrooms growing everywhere.  Cleite will fall through the floor (into zone 5: the caverns) if he goes in too far (it creaks a warning first). It will be a fatal fall if he hasn't befriended the moth trapped in zone 2. 

Zone 5: The Caverns
The caverns are a kind of dungeon.  Dungeons represent a change of pace in the game.  Dungeons play like NES Legend of Zelda, with simple real time combat and puzzle solving events.  There are many obstacles and hostile creatures in the caverns.  There is also a way back out to the surface, but he must go down deeper to go up.  In the depths, cleite discovers a functioning Fairy ring.  It is through this ring that the witch found her way to Tír na nÓg.  Later, after he has learned how to navigate the fairy rings, Cleite can cross this portal to Zone 6: Tír Aslínn. 

Zone 6:  Tír Aslínn
A bleak and blasted land, with many hostile and undead creatures.  Cleite's best chance of survival here is stealth and cunning.  Many of the creatures he meets will try to kill him without provocation.  Some of them will try to capture him by knocking him unconscious. (Cleite's 3rd dream)  


Zone 7: The Grey witches dungeon
The witches dungeon is a ruined & haunted monastery.
If cleite has been captured, he will wake-up without his equipment in a small cell.
Eventually his moth comes and can help him escape cleite can escape his cell and cunningly deceive the guards.  Some of the other faries are locked up tight in adjacent cells.  Zone 7 leads back to Zone 6 and also to Zone 8: the Grey Witch's stronghold.

Zone 8: the Stronghold:
Contains evidence that the witch is up to something.  She seems to be building an Armada. Her ships are gigantic horizontal Fairyeaters with masts and rigging crewed by 'Ciaroga' (fairyeater golems).   The implication is that she is preparing to conquer Tír na nÓg (actually she is organizing a force to reclaim Ireland from the Celts.).  The witch can eventually be found and confronted in her tower at the top of Zone 8. 

Main Menu:

when loaded, the game begins at the main menu.  The game theme fades in, and the game title appears above the following selectable options

Gaeilge (Irish)
Bearla  (English) 
Éalu    (Escape)

Selecting 'Gaeilge' begins the game in Irish.
Selecting 'Bearla' begins a game in English
'Éalu' exits the game.

If the player choses Bearla, the music fades and the screen changes to show: 


Camp-site

The player character stands by a burned out campfire, with several other characters sitting and lieing around.  It is a cold early morning.  There is a path to the west, with a road sign.  On right-click the road sign reads "Back to main menu".  The player can walk the westward path, and will be taken back to the main menu. 

Or, the player can talk to the other characters.  They each offer short speeches elaborating on the 'Background' and 'Concept' parts of the design document above.  Further conversation results in quotes on translation, language acquisition, and language theory.  The database from which they draw is extensive, and occasionally more NPCs arrive and join in the discussion.  But nothing can really be achieved here.  Eventually (it is hoped) the player will chose to return to the main menu.



If the player chooses Gaeilge, s/he has the option of starting a new game (cluiche núa) or restoring a saved game (cluiche reatha).

Selecting new game starts the game at Scene 1- Cleite's 1st dream.



Scene 1 - Cleite's 1st dream:

Cleite seems to be flying, but as the camera zooms out we see he is actually just running, doing superman arms with his cape streaming out behind him.  Suddenly he is smiting skeletons left and right with his sword and a dashing smile. Next thing we know, Cleite is looking badass as he does battle with a Dragon wizard.
Cleite can choose from an extensive range of spells from his spellbook (lighting bolts, fire lances, Cone of cold etc) but each of them fizzle, and the dragon starts to grin, and the skeletons start to rise.

Cleite can ask 'Cén faith 'nach n'oibrionn mo chuid driocht?' (why doesn't my magic work?)
and the dragon says 'Tá a fios ag gach duinne, ní feidir le sióg gan scithan driocht a usaid.' (Everybody knows, a fairy without wings can't use magic')
Cleite can ask 'Cén faith nach bhfuil scíthan agam?'(Why don't I have wings?)
But the dragon just opens his mouth wide and issues a harsh buzzing sound (brrríííííííííííííííí)

Scene 2-1 Cleite's room

Cleite wakes from his dream with a jolt as his alarm has been ringing (brrrrííííí)
He is late for class.  His room is small and in disarray.  
There are sketches on the floor, and drawings on the walls.  The player can spend some time exploring the room, (or come back to it later) but eventually the right thing to do is to put on his robes and go down  down to the lecture hall. 

Scene 3-1 An Leachtlann (The lecture hall)

A small lecture theatre.  Most students are day-dreaming or asleep.  We see cleite with earnest attention (but a puzzled expression) trying his best to make sense of the lecture.  The lecture is delivered by a robed fairy, who drones incomprehensible Irish from a podium in front of a blackboard at the top of the class.  The blackboard has archaic diagrams labeled in old Irish script.  (The diagrams are instructions on how to use 'fairy rings' to gate to other dimensions, but the player should not have enough information to decipher them at this stage.)

The player can look and interact with things around him to some extent.  
We see a greenhaird student (Glasó) behind cleite doodling on a page, and showing the page to his desk mate, who laughs.  Glassó draws a fairy wing, and pins it to Cleite's cape, which causes a fit of giggling.

The player can choose for cleite to  A) try laugh it off,
                                     B) react aggressively,
                                     C) stay focused on the lesson.

A & B result in the same thing- the teacher shouts angrily, and cleite is called to the front of the class ('Tar anseo!').  The lesson is halted and the teacher will repeat his summon until the player approaches the front of class.

If cleite stays focused on the lesson, Glassó gives him another wing which results in more laughter.  Cleite can choose the same ABC options.  If C is chosen again, Glassó and his buddy (Connín) continue to pester him until he choses A or B.  If he tries to change seats he gets the same reaction as if he chose A or B.


The teacher gives cleite a terrifying stare, and demands to know why his lecture was interrupted.  
A) cleite can show the teacher the offending artwork
B) Cleite can play dumb.

Either way the teacher will react in the same way, with an aggressive but incomprehensible stream of Irish words, and points to the blackboard.  
The player can approach the blackboard which becomes a GUIDialogue box, waiting for some input from the player.  
The player will be confused as to what s/he should write, but that's ok, because Cleite is also confused. 
There is no wrong answer. All that is required is for the player to type something and press enter.
The teacher's only interest is to humiliate Cleite. Just as cleite puts chalk to board, the teacher hoists the blackboard out of Cleite's reach.  He unfolds his wings and flies up beside the board, and waits mockingly, knowing full well that Cleite cannot fly.


The teacher laughs forcefully, and the rest of the students join in dutifully (except Glassó and Coinnín, who were only playing around.  The teacher's prank is far crueler.)
Cleite is humiliated and leaves the class.  He gains 10 exp points and the chalk is added to his inventory.


Cleite can now explore the school.  His sprite.view is changed to a slumped posture.  He can explore the contents of his room, visit the library, the kitchens or the gardens.

If he goes to the library at this stage, he gets a pep talk from the librarian, gains the 'magic' book, and his sprite.view is returned to normal. (Scene 4)

If he goes to the garden, he finds the trapped moth (scene 5)


Scene 4 : The Librarian's gift


There are many interesting things in the libarary.

But if cleite has just come from scene 3 an leachtlann, he will automatically find a quiet corner to cry.

The librarian sees him and asks him what happened.  He sniffles and mimes what happened in Scene 3 : an Leachtlann

She gives him a 'ganbatte ne' and a gift of a big beautiful book with blank pages.

The book appears as a clickable button on the HUD.


She teaches him how to use the book.
Cleite can draw anything he sees (IE anything the player clicks on) and receive inspired insight into the nature of the thing (text information about the object appears on the page beside the picture)  Conversely, he has only to write any word he hears but doesn't understand, and images will appear on the page.

  
The librarian tells him it is a magic book, though in-fact the book itself is non-magical.
Most faries are adept at illusion, transmutation and conjuration magic.  Cleite's gift is Divination.  (He can discover this if he ever tries to use his ability on 'normal' paper.) 

{technically, the book is a link to a database of images and words from the game.  Entering a word from the database calls the corresponding image and a skritchy.wav.  Having a quill and ink in the inventory lets cleite change the move cursor to a quill cursor.  Clicking on an object in the map with the quill cursor opens the book, calls the corresponding image, skritchy.wav and text.  This database will be the most extensive one in the game.  It is hoped that no matter what object cleite chooses to draw, or what word he 'looks up' there will be an appropriate entry.  In the case that there is no correlating word or picture, a random selection from a smaller database of incomprehensible scribbles and illegible writings will be called; and Cleite will squint at it and shrug.}


 
When cleite leaves the library, the students are heading to another lecture (Scene 6: Swordfighting).  Glassó and Coinnín offer their apologies.  Cleite can Accept or reject the offer.  If he accepts, they drag him laughing to class.
If he rejects they shrug and back off quietly.  Cleite can still join them.


Scene 5: Mothó


When Cleite enters the gardens for the first time, (before or after the encounter with the witch) a bright red ball is on the path. 
Cleite can throw or kick the ball gGUI: ("Caith an liathroid"/ "tabhair cic do");
and it goes into the bushes, and then rolls back out onto the path.
This will happen however long he spends clicking the ball.
If he clicks the bushes, he'll find a trap.  Selecting the trap calls gGUI_Trap.  In this window, cleite can turn dials and  cogs to solve the puzzle, result is the cage springs open and a giant hairy monster jumps out on cleite.
The 'giant hairy monster' turns out to be a giant moth.  It behaves like a big shaggy dog, complete with slobbery tongue and bad breath.  It is delighted to be free, and will be Cleite's allie for the rest of the game.  The player can give the moth a name. (gGUI.["Cad is ainm duit? /n_ _________."] )


They play for a while, and eventually the moth flies away.  (He'll be back later)

Further examination of the cage will reveal something shining at the back.
Cleite can try to grab it.  If he does this without jamming the locking mechanism first, he is trapped in the box and the game is over.
Otherwise, he finds a glowing star lure, which he can add to his inventory.




Scene 6-1: Swordfighting_1

This is a mini game.
The students have to lay out the mats for the class.
The mats have a celtic knotwork pattern on them, and must be arranged and rotated to complete the puzzle.
player controls the mat placement with the following buttons:
Suas (up) 
sios (down)
cle  (left)
deas (right)
chas fó clé (turn left)
chas fó dheas (turn right).

When the puzzle is completed, the swordmaster enters the gym, and the students begin practice.

Scene 6-2: Swordfighting_2


When the Swordmaster enters, the students form 2 lines and stand at attention.
There are 2 parts to the lesson.  
1. The swordmaster presents the first half of a 'Seanfhocal' (Irish saying).  Player has a few seconds to make Cleite answer, by selecting the right answer from a gGUI.Answers box, before one of the other students puts up his/her hand to answer.  This works like the 'insult' swordfighting mechanic in the 'Monkey Island' games. 

2. The student's pair off with their partners, and practice Seanfhocal swordfighting.  The amount of right answers 
 the player guessed in the first part of this exercise determines the difficulty level of the second part.  

If the player makes a wrong answer, he is struck by his partner's sword and knocked unconscious.

Cleite has his 2nd dream. 

  


Scene 7:Cnag-Cnag

There's a knocking at the door.  Cleite is sent to answer it.
When he opens the door, there's nobody there.          
But when he closes the door, the Grey Witch is standing behind it.  
Cleite can run or talk to her.  Talking to her results in many branches of dialogue, but all of them result in his death.
His only hope is to run.  The school becomes a dungeon, the witch relentlessly follows him wherever he goes.  If she catches him, she'll kill him.  The only 'safe' place is to run back to the classroom. 

Cleite bursts in, shouting about the Witch.
The Swordmaster grabs a spear, and shouts for the students to hide.
While the Master and the Witch do battle, Cleite and the students have a few seconds to find a place to hide.
There is only one place for cleite, under the table at the top of the room.  It's a terrible spot, but he is bullied out of any other space.

Eventually the Witch overcomes the Swordmaster.  She turns him into a frog and stomps on him.
Then she starts sniffing around, finding the students and shoving them into a bag.
Cleite can stay hidden, or summon his courage and attack her.

If cleite chooses to stay hidden:

A closeup of cleite, sweating, eyes squeezed shut, erratic breathing, listening to the witch find and abduct the other students.  Then everything goes quiet.  He holds his breath and strains to listen.  He hears what sounds like joints popping.
Finally opening his eyes, he sees the witch has found him, and extended her head at an unnatural angle to smile at him face to face under the table.  (game over)

If cleite chooses to fight:
Despite his fear, Cleite launches himself at the witch.
All he achieves is to fall at her feet, holding a handful of her teeth.

 She laughs.  The Cailleach is from Tír Aslínn.  It is a condition of her use of the portals, that she cannot harm on the same day anyone who injures her from Tír na nÓg.  She laughingly promises to come back for him soon, and leaves with her captives. It is a mystery how she managed to use the Fairy Circle which had been (deliberately) in a state of ruin since Ancient times.


The Swordmaster resumes his fairy form shortly after she leaves, but he is terribly injured and can only 'Ribbit' weakly.





Cleite helps the Swordmaster to the kitchen, and is sent by the librarian to fetch the herbs she needs to make a 'Deoch Laighs' (healing drink)

At this stage (or before the encounter with the Grey Witch, depending on the player's actions) the librarian gives Cleite a gift:  a fine big book with blank pages. 



Cleite Can overhear the Librarian talking to the Swordmaster.
It is a mystery to them how the witch managed to enter Tír na nÓg.  They presume she used the Fairy Circle; but it has been (deliberately) in a state of ruin since Ancient times.  (Later, Cleite may find evidence that the  teacher from Scene 3-1: an Leachtlann reconstructed an underground gate in the caverns beneath the school.  The teacher is secretly an agent of the witch.)

The librarian sends Cleite off to gather the regents for the deoch laighs. (Gives him the book if he has not already gotten it).

This is the first quest and the start of the game.   Most of the plants are easy to find (and can be identified by using the book) but from this point on, the scope of the game will open up beyond the relative safety of the school.  Cleite will be sent into dungeons, caves, and distant lands.  He will confront monsters, traps and many dangerous situations.

The last of the plants on his list is a kind of mushroom, which he can find in a cave in zone 2.  The cave had been the dwelling place of some creature, and is full of debris.  When Cleite walks towards the mushroom, if he hasn't secured himself with a climbing rope, he breaks through rotten wooden floorboards and falls to his death-

unless he has already made friends with the creature from Scene 5-1: Mothó; in which case he is helped to the cave floor and and has to find his way out of the caverns. 

Cleite, with the help of his friend 'Preab' the giant moth, embarks on a mission to rescue the Sídh.

He travels across (and under) the land, outwits terrifying monsters, makes new friends, and finally confronts the witch and saves his friends.  



Scene Final Boss Battle

The tower is ablaze.  The witch is frantically throwing books and belongings out the window, onto the deck of a floating Fairyeater galleon moored to a skyjetty accessible from her window.

At first she tries to magic cleite away, then she tries to physically defeat him (swordfight) finally she tries to reason with him.  She explains that her true intention is to command a force to Free Ireland from the brutal Celtic people who ousted the DeDannan Millenia ago.  (Time passes more slowly in Tír na nÓg; it has not occured to her that much has happened in Ireland since when it was the land of the Tuatha DeDannan, nor would it matter to her.) 


The Story:


The story begins at a remote Warrior Academy for Sídh, on a small island in southern Tír na nÓg.
Our hero, Cleite is a Sídh and a resident at the school.  He dreams of becoming a 'Fianna Sídh' (Sídh warrior) but is not officially a student at the school.  He has no wings.  He was found and adopted by one of the teachers (the Swordmaster).  Having no wings is considered to be a terrible disfigurement among the Sídh, and disqualifies him from becoming one of the Fianna Sídh.  It is thought to prohibit him from using fairy magic, but in fact (and as he later comes to learn) it just means his magic is more subtle.

Cleite spends his days performing the menial tasks at the school (these are represented as mini games and tutorials).  He is allowed to attend lectures, and is basically treated as a (very) junior student.

One day, 'An Cailleach Liath' (the grey witch) tricks Cleite into letting her enter the school.  She defeats the Swordmaster, and kidnaps 5 of the students.  Cleite goes on a quest to rescue them.



 His friends are abducted by 'an Cailleach Líath' - a witch from Tír Aslínn.  Cleite goes on a quest to confront the witch and save his friends.  Along the way he faces many challenges and hardships, and uncovers her plot to conquer Tír na nÓg.  Eventually he saves (some all or none of) his friends,  and has the Cailleach Liath at his mercy.  She reveals that that her plan is actually to lead a crusade to conquer the land of Banba.  During the dramatic climax of the game (She is the 'End of Game Boss') She offers him beautiful leathery wings and a place at the head of her forces (Tuatha Dé Dannan) if he will spare her.  The game has 2 possible endings:
Cleite accepts the offer and claim his wings 
or Cleite banishes the Witch and returns to the school wingless but triumphant.     
  

Tír Aslínn:  Castle dungeon interior
Dark stone room. lit only by glow from computer screen

A goblin clacks away at the keyboard, until his alarm rings.  He snoozes it impatiently, but shortly presses send, switches off the steampunk computer, and stands. musses back his hair.  
and thirstily drinks an enormous glass of water with a great satisfied 'ahh...'
Pulls on a heavy diving suit.  Sits down. Puts on hoodie and heavy quilted tracksuit (jumping up and down to get the zip up, it jingles with brass clips and catches) . Headband, heavy goggles. Puts on a breastplate, gauntlets, boots, gigantic boxy helm.
picks up a trident.

Sighs. 

Opens steampunk door:  Flames rush in with a whoosh, lifting cups and mirror and sheets like a great hurricane.  Steps outside.  Slams door. Hurricane settles  Time passes.

Time passes  
The steampunk door-lock clicks, and spins.  Door opens with a whoosh- flames lick in.
A glowing red figure steps in, and closes the door behind him.

He stands for a moment, pinging, glow starting to fade.
Takes off the helm, boots, gauntlets.  "hsss- ah!" singes his fingers a little on the breastplate and it falls to the floor
takes off headband, hoodie and tracksuit, kicks them under the bed.  Pours another great glass of water, gluggs it fiercely, clouds of steam rising from his skin.  'Ahhh..'  Pours another and sits down in front of his computer to check his mail from Gaelgrá.com (he and the cruel teacher are exchanging 'love' letters)



There are 2 kinds of enemies in the game world- wandering monsters and event monsters.
A wandering monster is a random hostile creature like a bat or a giant rat.  These are specific to locations, they re spawn, and they should not present too much of a challenge to the player.  

An event monster is part of the story and cannot usually be defeated with normal weapons. Sampla, the grey-witch is a hostile character that reoccurs throughout the game and can only be defeated at the end of the game.


Currency: Player can collect silver coins 'airgead' from different places in the game world. Hidden caches, solved quests and wandering monsters are sources of airgead.


In the forest is a wandering merchant (tinker?) who will sell arrows, healing potions, booze and other adventuring goodies.


Cleite had an energy bar, but most event monsters just cause sudden death. Energy bar measures trap damage, random monster damage, and is a warning against silly mistakes.
  

These are effective for destroying terrain, and attacking wandering monsters.


How to use the fairy gates?

You have to know where you are going, and ask each of the stones for their permission in the right order.  The right order is order of seniority.
This information is collected piecemeal by Cleite, from his polite conversations at the tea party. and during his experiments, he may be catapulted maliciously into the seas of alien worlds, into high Earth orbit etc. With only enough time to observe that this is not the intended destination.


At the bottom of the caverns, by the water is an NPC- 
A wise old gnome who tends the portal.  (he's a bit mad.  The portal stones have been dressed up as people sitting around a tea table.)  He'll happily invite cleite to tea, and make introductions.  This is a tense moment for cleite- the gnome is obviously loopy- causing offence will be easy and fatal.)

If cleite manages to snatch the disguise away, he sighs and admits (reluctantly) that yes, it is a portal, and yes, it is being used (as he calls her)  queen Bavmorda.  He says her Ciaróga use the portal almost every day,  Speaking to one stone, then another, and then disappearing in a flash.

The gnome doesn't know exactly how to use the gateway, but speculates that the information might be found in the Fairy Library, if it's still there.  (it's been a while since he was top-side.)

If cleite mentions the witch, he becomes frightened- (Shhh!  Ní cailleach, ach Banríonn!)


 


I agree.
Not just a game; a whole suite of games. A new game culture. Maybe it starts with a game. Maybe it starts with something simple, and modular, and we build on it. On one hand, even one game can be a gigantic task. Ar an lámh eile, it won't happen by itself. So it's a question of how to proceed, and that's a big question.
The temptation (domsa) is to just jump in and get started. There are advantages to that- but it's not the way to achieve something really good. Ríomhchlarú needs to be developed conceptually. In my opinion, we should see the development of the concept as the first step. There are big-idea questions that need to be articulated. There might not be any one-right-way of doing it; but I'm fairly cinnte that the project begins with a discussion of ideas.
(I'm onboard, dála an sceal).

But there is such a thing as a Gaelic perspective. This perspective is not merely (or exclusively) nationalist. The fact that this perspective struggles even for it's right to exist even in the Republic indicate the incredibly lopsided status quo.











